% your subscription for GETFEM++ information mailing list is confirmed

jmse@poncelet.univ-metz.fr               %  1 - Jean-Marc Sac-Epée 
fresl@master.grad.hr                     %  2 - Kresimir Fresl 
Stuart.Anstee@dsto.defence.gov.au        %  3 - Anstee Stuart 
gerard.sookahet@artenum.com              %  4 - gerard sookahet 
prodelas@ugr.es                          %  5 - Pedro González 
bormin@ssec.wisc.edu                     %  6 -
markus.faust@t-online.de                 %  7 -
machniew@ichip.pw.edu.pl                 %  8 - Piotr Machniewski 
osman@fuse.net                           %  9 - Osman Buyukisik
paolo.bertolo@libero.it                  % 10 - Paolo Bertolo 
kwang@cs.sunysb.edu                      % 11 - Kexiang Wang 
osman@fuse.net                           % 12 - Osman Buyukisik 
jurak@math.hr                            % 13 - Mladen Jurak 
rafael.rodriguez@uca.es                  % 14 - Rafa Rodriguez Galvan 
ingemar.carlen@teknikgruppen.se          % 15 - Ingemar Carlén 
igor@mtm.ufsc.br                         % 16 - Igor Mozolevski 
likask@twins.pk.edu.pl                   % 17 - Lukasz Kaczmarczyk
deluciam@pil.phys.uniroma1.it            % 18 - Marzia De Lucia
kai.ludwig@uni-tuebingen.de              % 19 - Kai Ludwig 
zhrangui@hotmail.com                     % 20 - rui zhang
jjwalker999@yahoo.com                    % 21 - jj walker
rafal@mim.pcz.czest.pl                   % 22 - Buldi Rafal
petrouchka@sohu.com                      % 23 - petrouchka
rafal@mim.pcz.czest.pl                   % 24 - Dobrakowski
servis@deslab.ntua.gr                    % 25 - Dimitris Servis
moloned@tcd.ie                           % 26 - David Moloney
thomas.laverne@igeoss.com                % 27 - Thomas Laverne



Yves.Renard@gmm.insa-tlse.fr             % pour le retour
